## Exception handling

An exception is a problem that arises during the execution of a program. A C# exception is a response to an exceptional circumstance that arises while a program is running.


Exceptions provide a way to transfer control from one part of a program to another. C# exception handling is built upon four keywords: **try**, **catch**, **finally**, and **throw**.

-   **try** − A try block identifies a block of code for which particular exceptions is activated. It is followed by one or more catch blocks.
    
-   **catch** − A program catches an exception with an exception handler at the place in a program where you want to handle the problem. The catch keyword indicates the catching of an exception.
    
-   **finally** − The finally block is used to execute a given set of statements, whether an exception is thrown or not thrown. For example, if you open a file, it must be closed whether an exception is raised or not.
    
-   **throw** − A program throws an exception when a problem shows up. This is done using a throw keyword.


```cs
try {
   // statements causing exception
} catch( ExceptionName e1 ) {
   // error handling code
} catch( ExceptionName e2 ) {
   // error handling code
} catch( ExceptionName eN ) {
   // error handling code
} finally {
   // statements to be executed
}
```

### Exception Classes

C# exceptions are represented by classes. The exception classes in C# are mainly directly or indirectly derived from the **`System.Exception`** class. Some of the exception classes derived from the System.Exception class are the **`System.ApplicationException`** and **`System.SystemException`** classes.

The **`System.ApplicationException`** class supports exceptions generated by application programs. Hence the exceptions defined by the programmers should derive from this class.

The **`System.SystemException`** class is the base class for all predefined system exception.

- **`System.IO.IOException`** : Handles I/O errors.
- **`System.IndexOutOfRangeException`** : Handles errors generated when a method refers to an array index out of range.
- **`System.ArrayTypeMismatchException`** : Handles errors generated when type is mismatched with the array type.
- **`System.NullReferenceException`** : Handles errors generated from referencing a null object.
- **`System.DivideByZeroException`** : Handles errors generated from dividing a dividend with zero.
- **`System.InvalidCastException`** : Handles errors generated during typecasting.
- **`System.OutOfMemoryException`** : Handles errors generated from insufficient free memory.
- **`System.StackOverflowException`** : Handles errors generated from stack overflow.

### throw exception

The `throw` keyword allows you to raise an exception. Here’s the syntax of how to use the `throw` keyword:

```cs
throw exception;
```


```cs
if (condition)
{
    throw exception;
}
```

Eg:
```cs
using System;

namespace ErrorHandlingApplication {
   class DivNumbers {
      int result;
      
      DivNumbers() {
         result = 0;
      }
      public void division(int num1, int num2) {
         try {
            result = num1 / num2;
         } catch (DivideByZeroException e) {
            Console.WriteLine("Exception caught: {0}", e);
         } finally {
            Console.WriteLine("Result: {0}", result);
         }
      }
      static void Main(string[] args) {
         DivNumbers d = new DivNumbers();
         d.division(25, 0);
         Console.ReadKey();
      }
   }
}
```

### rethrow exceptions
In some cases, you may want to re-throw an exception after you have caught it in the **`catch`** block.

```cs
try
{
    // Some code that might throw an exception
}
catch (Exception ex)
{
    // Handle the exception
    Console.WriteLine($"An exception occurred: {ex.Message}");

    // Rethrow the exception
    throw;
}
```

> rethrow exception using the `throw` statement.

### User-Defined Exceptions
C# provides you with many built-in exception classes. Sometimes, these built-in exception classes are not sufficient to describe the error in your application. In this case, you can define custom exception classes.

By definition, a custom exception is an exception that you create to represent a specific error in your application.

You can create a user-defined exception class which is derived from the **Exception** class.

To create a custom exception, you define a class that inherits from the `System.Exception` class. By convention, an exception class ends with `Exception` like `MyCustomException`:

```cs
class MyCustomException: Exception
{
}
```

A custom exception class should have three standard constructors:

```cs
class MyCustomException: Exception
{
    MyCustomException(): base() { }
    MyCustomException(string message) : base(message) { }
    MyCustomException(string message, Exception innerException) : base(message, innerException) { }
}

```

-   The first constructor is a default constructor that takes no arguments.
-   The second constructor takes a string message that describes the exception.
-   The third constructor takes both a message and an inner exception, which you can use to chain exceptions together to describe the error in more detail.


```cs
using System;

namespace UserDefinedException {
   class TestTemperature {
      static void Main(string[] args) {
         Temperature temp = new Temperature();
         try {
            temp.showTemp();
         } catch(TempIsZeroException e) {
            Console.WriteLine("TempIsZeroException: {0}", e.Message);
         }
         Console.ReadKey();
      }
   }
}
public class TempIsZeroException: Exception {
   public TempIsZeroException(string message): base(message) {
   }
}
public class Temperature {
   int temperature = 0;
   
   public void showTemp() {
      
      if(temperature == 0) {
         throw (new TempIsZeroException("Zero Temperature found"));
      } else {
         Console.WriteLine("Temperature: {0}", temperature);
      }
   }
}

```




### ref
https://www.tutorialspoint.com/csharp/csharp_exception_handling.htm

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/exceptions/exception-handling

https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/csharp/fundamentals/exceptions/

https://www.csharptutorial.net/csharp-tutorial/csharp-throw-exception/

